---
title: Enforcing SSL CA verification
date: 2015-12-27
tags: security, SSL, C
---

## Overview

I started this project with a friend of mine as a school project for a
security course during my last year of undergrad.
The project is called Certificate Authority Verification (CAV). It is a tool that
allows you to intercept
the certificate verification process of any non-browser application using
OpenSSL as a shared library. Interception is made possible by building CAV as a
shared object and using Linux’s `LD_PRELOAD` environment variable to override the
certificate verification functionality of OpenSSL and enforce verification
against a trusted store of your choice.

**_NOTE: I'm no C guru or SSL for that matter, I'm experimenting with this stuff
and CAV is not something that should be trusted_**

## Motivation

SSL is heavily used in providing secure communication over the Internet.
Certificate verification is one of the main components in SSL.
Ensuring the correctness of the verification process ensures the security of SSL.
Therefore, knowing how to properly use SSL and verify certificates is an
essential part in establishing secure SSL connections. The problem with SSL is
that most software developers misunderstand it and use
it improperly (myself included), which then leads to vulnerability to
[MITM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Man-in-the-middle_attack) attacks. This
post is inspired by two academic papers ["The Most Dangerous Code in the
World: Validating SSL Certificates in Non-Browser Software"](http://www.cs.utexas.edu/~shmat/shmat_ccs12.pdf)
and ["Securing SSL Certificate Verification through Dynamic Linking"](http://cise.ufl.edu/~bates/documents/Bates_Ccs14.pdf).


## Intercepting dynamically linked libraries

For any dynamically linked library, you can override its functionality using
the Linux `LD_PRELOAD` environment variables.

The first step to override an existing library functionality is building you own
library, _as a shared object_, that contains the same symbols (function name) of
the existing dynamically linked library. Then you set the `LD_PRELOAD`
environment variables to contain your library:

```bash
export LD_PRELOAD=/absolute/path/to/liboverride.so:$LD_PRELOAD
```

Setting `LD_PRELOAD` to contain your library means that the dynamic
linked/loader will load your `liboverride.so` before all other libraries.
Therefore, the symbols that you override will be invoked first. That is all
you need to know about `LD_PRELOAD` to understand this blog post. If you're
interested in it, you can learn more about it [here](https://rafalcieslak.wordpress.com/2013/04/02/dynamic-linker-tricks-using-ld_preload-to-cheat-inject-features-and-investigate-programs/).

## Looking up symbol names

The `LD_PRELOAD` environment variable allows you to override a function completely.
However, I just want to intercept it, verify the presented certificate chain, and then perform
the equivalent of invoking `super()` to return execution to the original function.
The second part of the puzzle is the piece of code that allows me to return
execution to the original function. For that, we use C's `dlsym()`.

The function `dlsym()` allows you to lookup a symbol in a open, _or to be opened_,
object file based on the string name of the symbol. You can tell the compiler to
open the object file `libx.so` at run-time and invoke function `hello_world`
from it. Taken from [The Open Group docs](http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/functions/dlsym.html),
here's an example of how to use `dlsym()`.

```c
void *handle;
int (*fptr)(int), *iptr, result;

/* open the needed symbol table */
handle = dlopen("/usr/home/me/libfoo.so", RTLD_LOCAL | RTLD_LAZY);

/* find the address of the function my_function */
fptr = (int (*)(int))dlsym(handle, "my_function");

/* find the address of the data object my_object */
iptr = (int *)dlsym(handle, "my_OBJ");

/* invoke my_function, passing the value of my_OBJ as the parameter */
result = (*fptr)(*iptr);
```

## The core of CAV

In my case, the open object file is already a dynamically linked library.
Therefore, I don't have to invoke `dlopen()` on a given object, because it is
already open. Here my snippet of the code that hijacks OpenSSL verification:

```c
/*
*   These typedefs just point to aliases with function types and arguments
*   identical to the functions being hijacked.
*/
typedef long (*orig_SSL_get_verify_result_f_type)(const SSL *ssl);
typedef int (*orig_SSL_connect_f_type)(SSL *s);

long SSL_get_verify_result(const SSL *ssl) {

    DEBUG_PRINT("%s\n","Hijacked");
    int err = 0;

    if (0 != (err = verify_cert(ssl))) {
        return err;
    } else {
        DEBUG_PRINT("%s\n","Return execution to OpenSSL");

        /*  Equavilent of saying of:
        *     SSL * orig_SSL_get_verify_result;
        */
        orig_SSL_get_verify_result_f_type orig_SSL_get_verify_result;

        /*  Equavilent of saying of:
        *     long (*orig_SSL_get_verify_result)(const SSL *ssl);
        *     orig_SSL_get_verify_result = &SSL_get_verify_result;
        */
        orig_SSL_get_verify_result =
            (orig_SSL_get_verify_result_f_type)dlsym(RTLD_NEXT,"SSL_get_verify_result");

        return orig_SSL_get_verify_result(ssl);
    }
}
```

The above code does three things:

1. Redefines the original function `SSL_get_verify_result()`
2. Enforce certificate verification by calling `verify_cert(ssl)`
3. Resolve the original function pointer `orig_SSL_get_verify_result(ssl)` and
call it


You can also see that the code fails `SSL_get_verify_result()` if it does not pass
the custom checking `verify_cert(ssl)`. One other thing I should mention here is
the `RTLD_NEXT` handle used in finding the original function symbol. `RTLD_NEXT`
tells your program to look for the specified symbol in the next object in the load
order. Since we used `LD_PRELOAD` to give the library `libcav.so` higher load
order, we use `RTLD_NEXT` to look for the symbol in the next object file that
contains the symbol. That is, ignore the symbol defined in the current object
and look for the symbol in the next object that contains the symbol name.

## CAV Verification

CAV verifies the peer certificates based on a configurable on-disk trusted
store. CAV looks for a `$HOME/.cavrc` file that contains the path to your
trusted store. Here is what the file should look like:

```
CA_FILE /path/to/trusted/certificate/file
CA_DIR /path/to/trusted/certificate/directory
LOG /path/to/log/file
```

The value of `CA_DIR` could be something like `/etc/ssl/certs` on Ubuntu or any
specific path that contains PEM certificate files you trust. If you build CAV and
set the `LD_PRELOAD` environment variable to contain
`libcav.so`, then CAV will try to look for the `$HOME/.cavrc` file and load your
trusted store and verify the peer certificate chain against it.

How does CAV verify the peer's certificate? Here's the body of the
`verify_cert()` function:

```c
int verify_cert(const SSL *s) {

    init_config_file();
    int err = 0;

    /* Find the peer certificate chain */
    STACK_OF(X509) * sk = SSL_get_peer_cert_chain(s);

    if (NULL == sk) {
        DEBUG_PRINT("%s\n", "Certificate chain is not available");
        return (err = -1);
    } else {
        DEBUG_PRINT("%s\n", "Found peer certificate chain");
    }

    if (0 != (err = verify_X509_cert_chain(sk))) {
        DEBUG_PRINT("%s\n", "Failed to verify X509 certificate chain");
        return (err = -1);
    }

    DEBUG_PRINT("%s\n", "Successfully verified X509 certificate chain");

    return 0;
}
```

The above code shows that you can get the certificate chain, _including the user
certificate_, from the SSL connection object. After you get the certificate
stack `sk`, `verify_X509_cert_chain()` iterates over all certificates and loads an
SSL store in memory to check each certificate against the loaded store. The
loaded store is the result of loading the `CA_DIR` path taken from `$HOME/.cavrc`.

If you're interested in trying out CAV, you can view the source
[here](https://github.com/iFahad7/ssl_cav). If you have [Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com),
you don't have to setup the project. You can just `vagrant up && vagrant ssh`
and starting hacking it. I've put instructions on how to setup the project and
see a demo of CAV in the project [readme](https://github.com/iFahad7/ssl_cav).
